Hello.
>> Yeah. Hi, my name's Claire Tennis. I
work for the New York Times. Do you have
5 to 10 minutes to chat? I believe you
took part in one of our polls recently.
>> Uh, sure, why not? Sure. Yeah, that's
fine. Yeah, that sounds great.
>> Yeah. Okay, go ahead.
>> From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroof.
This is the Daily.
>> How would you sum up your feelings about
Trump's second term so far in one word?
>> One word. Gee, let's see.
Great.
>> Excellent.
>> Cautious. Optimism.
>> Little uneven, chaotic,
>> horrible, embarrassing,
>> uh, terrifying.
>> Today, in a major new poll, the New York
Times asked voters what they thought of
the first eight months of President
Trump's second term.
>> I think the majority of his policies are
heading in the right direction. the
economy for the prices, they're starting
to come down. I wish they'd come down
more.
>> It's a period that's seen sweeping
policy changes that have left little of
the country untouched.
>> One of the biggest reason that I voted
for him, it was southern border, but the
way ICE is doing it is so horrible. I
think he's doing a good job, but the one
thing I wish that he would do is create
some type of program where the people
that are already here start a process
where he could get legalization.
>> I guess that I'm shocked at some of his
actions and disappointed in him. Maybe
generally I wish I hadn't voted for him.
>> My colleague Nate Conn explains what the
survey found and what it may tell us
about where the country is heading next.
We need to tone down the rhetoric. We
need to work to find common ground and
work through differences in opinions.
[Music]
>> It's Tuesday, September 30th.
Nate, I've been really looking forward
to talking to you because so much has
happened over the past several months
since you were last on the show. We've
had record tariffs, immigration raids,
the National Guard in American cities,
this massive domestic policy bill
passed. There's been an ongoing
retribution campaign against Trump's
enemies, and a wave of political
violence. It has honestly been a lot.
And here we are flying blind. No poll to
sort it all out. Top line, what did you
find?
>> Well, after interviewing more than 1300
Americans from across the country last
week, we found almost the exact same
results that we did in April on most of
the important questions. Despite all
that's transpired over the last 5 or 6
months, Trump's approval rating is one
point different than it was in April.
It's at 43% now. The Democrats are up
>> two points in the race for Congress
compared to three in April on almost
every issue that we asked about. The
results are just within a couple points
of what they were 6 months ago.
>> Okay, that is not what I was expecting.
How is it possible that when so much has
changed, the views have essentially
remained the same? Well,
>> I think it's worth going back to where
we were when we conducted our last poll.
This was just after the Liberation Day
tariffs were announced. It was when
Kilargo Garcia was in El Salvador. Doge
was still around and cutting government
programs left and right.
>> Right.
>> And at that time, Donald Trump was
suffering a clear political cost for the
excesses of his actions. On everything
we asked, voters said he was going too
far. and his ratings had declined since
the election. Now, what's happened since
then? He's pulled back on many of the
things I just mentioned. Doge is gone.
The liberation day tariffs are pulled
back. Kilome Rego Garcia is in the
United States. He's also gone further in
a whole bunch of areas that you've
already mentioned.
>> But the accumulated effect hasn't
necessarily been to worsen his position
politically since April. The voters who
he still had with him in April were
mostly strongly Republican leaning
voters. voters who backed him in 2016
and 2020 and 2024. And while I think
that we can probably come up with cases,
in fact, our poll provides some cases
where Trump has done things that those
voters aren't necessarily happy with,
much of what he has done, those voters
are happy with him about and they've
stuck by his side over the last few
months.
>> You're saying basically Trump's approval
numbers have remained stable, but
they're at a pretty low point.
>> Correct. You mentioned Kilar Obga Garcia
and and the people really didn't like
the excesses of the administration on
immigration. So let's talk about those
policies because as you noted more has
happened along those lines. There has
been in many ways an escalation of some
of those aggressive enforcement
approaches. More raids, more protests
about those raids. So what are people
saying about immigration now?
>> Well, I think that the public is of two
minds about the immigration issue right
now. On the one hand, the public still
supports deporting undocumented
immigrants back to their home countries.
They also think that most of the people
who the administration is deporting
should be deported. So that's a really
important way that the public is
generally on the administration side. On
the other hand, voters do think that the
president's going too far. And we didn't
ask about a specific case where voters
might disagree with the president. For
instance, they might disagree with
defying court orders or sending people
to countries that aren't their home
countries and so on. But what we did ask
was whether they thought that the
process for deportation was generally
fair or unfair. And most voters thought
it was unfair.
>> But between these two, you can see a
public that's kind of caught in between
support of a general goal and being kind
of repelled by the actual way the
administration is going about its
immigration policy.
>> Yeah. What do you make of that? because
it sounds like they want the thing that
he's pursuing, but they don't like what
he's actually doing to get there.
>> We have a couple of ways of getting at
how people feel overall about the
administration's policy. One is to ask
whether they approve or disapprove of
his handling of immigration and the
other is whether he's gone too far or
he's handling it about right or hasn't
gone far enough. And on both of those
questions, voters sort out to a negative
view of the president. They disapprove
of his handling of immigration and they
think he's gone too far. Now, it's worth
noting that in each case, the results
are really not that different than
April. So, although the president has
sort of gone further in terms of
undertaking more actions that go beyond
what someone might have wanted, he
hasn't necessarily convinced more people
in doing so that he's gone too far.
>> In terms of the potential for excesses,
Nate, did you specifically ask about the
deployment of the US military into
American cities? I mean, because in LA
and now in Portland, the deployment has
been intended to reinforce ISIS's
agenda. In DC, it was more squarely
about reducing crime, but overall, do
people see that as an overreach?
>> They do. We asked specifically whether
the president had gone too far in
deploying the National Guard to American
cities. 53% said that he did. Uh we also
asked whether they approved of his
deployment to Washington DC
specifically. A majority of voters said
they disapproved. And voters do have
real concerns about the president's
deployment of military forces as well.
More people were concerned that the
president could use the National Guard
to intimidate his political opponents
>> then were concerned that crime would
spiral out of control without the
National Guard. But there are a number
of voters who are really concerned about
crime. And although they may think the
president has gone too far, they
sympathize with the direction of his
effort. And indeed, crime is the issue
in the poll where he has his strongest
overall approval rating. H.
>> Now, it's not a great approval rating,
but it's better than everything else.
And I think that speaks to that even
when the president is doing things that
have potential to alienate people
because he's at least pushing in the
right direction, he does get some credit
from voters.
>> How do you square all of those things,
Nate? Is it just that people like the
fact that he's prioritizing the problems
that they care about regardless of his
approach? Well, I think that you can not
merely think that it's good that he's
prioritizing the issue, but you can
think it is good that the president has
taken serious efforts to try and reduce
crime. This is what they would be saying
to themselves and give him credit for
that.
>> Got it. So, it sounds like voters may
not like the means that Trump is using
in these cases, but they do approve of
the ends of the goals on both
immigration and public safety. It it
kind of seems as though people have
settled out. They've decided early on in
this presidency how they feel and they
haven't changed much.
>> I think that's right. I think that most
voters at this stage know where they
stand on what this second Trump term
looks like, which is being really
aggressive about trying to fulfill the
core promises of the America First
agenda, whether it's on immigration and
crime and so on. And for a lot of the
voters that put him over the top in the
last election, this is too much. And
they decided that pretty quickly. And
for the voters that weren't repelled by
his con in the first few months, there's
been nothing about what he's done since
then that's changed their mind. Even if
he's gone too far, they still appreciate
that he is trying to fulfill objectives
that they care about.
>> I want to talk about the economy. This
is a big issue that we haven't yet
addressed. Where do people stand on the
economy at this moment?
>> Well, they don't think the economy is
very good. Only 26% of voters think the
economy is good. Voters are much likely
to say that Trump has made the economy
worse than say he has made it better.
The proportion who say he's making it
worse is at 45%.
>> And his approval rate on the economy is
pretty similar to his approval rating on
everything else, which is say that you
only 44% of people think he's doing a
good job handling economic issues. And
it's worth remembering that in his first
term and also during his re-election
campaign that the economy was a big
strength and it's not a big strength for
him right now. the economy has been, you
know, his strongest issue, right? I
mean, how much of a red alert warning
sign should this be for him?
>> Well, I think that the economy has not
only been his strongest issue, but it's
been really critical to winning over the
voters who are on the margins of the
Trump coalition. We we talk all the time
about his MAGA base, but what wins the
voters in the middle? Whether it's
workingass white voters in Ohio or
working-class Latino voters in the Rio
Grand or the young voters that were
dissatisfied. The economy is really
critical to what gets him over the top.
So, at least for now, the state of the
economy as it is, we're kind of muddling
along, right? We're not in some deep
recession, but these aren't great
prosperous times either. muddling along
doesn't really threaten his base at this
point, but I think it makes it really
hard for him to win back the voters that
have put him over the top in recent
elections, but the midterms are coming.
It would seem like that could be an
opportunity for Democrats. Stability in
these numbers for Trump is obviously
better than things getting much worse
for him, but people care a lot about the
economy and they hold the party in power
accountable, right?
>> I think that's reasonable to expect. You
know, the poll right now shows Democrats
are up two on the question of whether
they'll vote for Democrats or
Republicans in the midterm election.
It's worth noting that's quite a bit
better than the result of the 2024
election for Democrats. The Republicans
won by three. So, this is a meaningful
improvement. It would probably be enough
for them to retake the House. It's also
not an extraordinary performance, right?
You know, they're not winning by seven
or eight points like they were in 2018.
I will point out also that the Democrats
have made their biggest gains compared
to 2024 among young and non-white
voters. The voters that swung most
towards Donald Trump in 2024 because of
the bad economy. That's the group that
in the poll looks like it's lurching
back towards Democrats. And the economy,
I think, very well might be an important
part of why those voters have swung back
to the extent they have, even if it
hasn't yet created the conditions for a
Democratic landslide or something that
people might hope for or imagine was
even likely given the president's low
approval rating.
>> Mhm.
>> Now, there are limits to what this lead
means. They're up only two points. For
some comparison, Biden won by four and a
half in 2020. There are more people in
the poll who say they are Republicans
than Democrats, which has historically
not been the case. And if the Democrats
are looking for a sweeping repudiation
of Donald Trump, I don't see how they
could look at these poll results and see
that on the horizon. Um, and I think
that is sort of what Democrats are
looking for.
>> Bottom line, when I look at this poll, I
see lots of signs that voters are
dissatisfied with Donald Trump, think
he's gone too far. I don't see any
evidence that voters are looking to buy
what the Democrats are selling either.
>> Even when you see opposition to some of
Trump's policies, that opposition is not
exactly driving voters into the arms of
Democrats, they aren't buying into
whatever they see as Democrats version
of solutions to the country's problems,
at least not in huge numbers. Sure,
there's a lot of room to disagree with
Donald Trump without agreeing with the
Democrats. And interestingly enough, on
some of the issues where you can imagine
that voters might be convinced of the
non-Trump position, the Democrats aren't
really owning that either. Like take
tariffs for instance. You would think
that Donald Trump's excessive tariffs,
which have, you know, in the minds of
the public hurt the economy and gone too
far, that that might create an opening
for the Democrats to campaign on
eliminating tariffs. That's not the
position they're taking, is it? So on
some of the things where Donald Trump
arguably has set the Democrats best up,
they're not necessarily in position to
capitalize on it either.
That said, one of the most interesting
things about this poll is that the
economic and policy issues that we've
been talking about do not rank highest
on the minds of voters right now. They
say that other issues are more important
problems. And that is not something that
I have seen before.
We'll be right back.
[Music]
Nate, if no one policy issue, including
the economy, was the most important
concern for people in this poll, what
was? So, in basically every poll for as
long as we've been doing this, we ask
people an open-ended question. What's
the most important problem facing the
country today? What's the most important
issue? And most of the time, the answer
is about the economy, jobs, cost of
living, and so on. Economic issues. In
this poll, for the first time, the most
common answers were about our politics.
>> What do you think is the most important
problem facing the country today?
I think our political division,
>> it's division amongst the nation, the
people.
>> Nobody's listened to anybody on either
side.
>> People can't share ideas and opinions
without being targeted by violence.
>> Things remind me of what was going on in
Germany around like 1939. It frightens
me when people label people calling
somebody a Nazi with not fully
comprehending that term because I think
it incentivizes people to do harm.
>> I think he's bringing the country very
close to civil war. He loves that idea
and it scared me so much. I pray to God
that we do get past this that somehow
people on the right and people on the
left in leadership roles say stop.
Enough violence has occurred in our
country.
>> We need to have a united front. We need
to have the country to come together.
And I just I don't know. I don't know if
you know I don't know if you're going to
be able to do that.
It's a diverse category of different
responses people can give about our
political system, right? But it might be
concern about Trump as a threat to
democracy. It might be concern about
political polarization and division. It
could be concern that Democrats are
going to perpetrate acts of political
violence. Very different ways that you
can be concerned about the health of our
democracy and our political system. When
you cobble all those answers together,
you got 36% of the respondents to this
poll listing a concern about our
political system and the health of our
politics as the most important problem
facing the country compared to just 21%
who listed an economic issue like the
stock market or the cost of living.
>> So, we're not talking about a concern
that was necessarily weighted to one
direction or another. It was just a
general sense that our politics is
broken. That's what you're saying,
>> right? Right? And it gets expressed in
different ways, but no matter how you
cut it, the problem is about our
political system.
>> Now, we should say that this poll was
taken right after the assassination of
Charlie Kirk. So, it makes sense that
these concerns about the health of our
politics were right on the top of mind
for many voters. And it's possible that
right as we head into a government
shutdown, people will start thinking
about something entirely differently
than the risk of political violence.
That said, this is not some isolated
occurrence. This is part of a longerterm
trend towards a more divisive kind of
politics in the country and it could
also continue to get worse even if it's
also possible that it gets better.
>> You know, when people say that they're
concerned about the economy, the stakes
to me at least seem pretty intuitive.
It's their livelihood, their ability to
provide for their families. With an
answer that's about politics, it's just
less straightforward. And I'm wondering
if you think this is an emotional
reaction to just how unsettling the last
few weeks and months have been or or
what you think the stakes are here.
>> Well, I think there's a little bit of
both. You know, there are lots of
different levels of alarm. There are
people who think that political
divisions might lead to dysfunction or
like the government shutdown we're about
to have this week. There are people who
might think that this division could
threaten the continuity of democracy in
the United States. So there's a wide
range of concerns that people have about
what political division might lead to.
But they're not just emotional concerns.
They're not just reacting against the
tone in Washington. They think that
political division and this range of
political problems has real world
consequences. And I think the simplest
question in the h poll that we have that
speaks to this is that we ask people
whether the America's political system
can address the nation's problems or if
we're just too politically divided to
solve our problems. And what did they
say?
>> They said by a 2 to1 margin that we're
too divided politically to solve our
problems. 64% said too divided to solve
our problems. This is a significant
change in the last few years. We asked
that same question in September of 2020,
which by the way was not exactly some
time when American politics was kumbaya.
>> No. Middle of a pandemic, Black Lives
Matter protests, lots of unsettling
moments then, too.
>> Even at that point, 54% said we could
still address the nation's problems.
only 40% said we were too politically
divided. So, we've gone in just the last
5 years from being maybe not exactly
optimistic, but perhaps cautiously
optimistic that we can still solve our
problems to pretty resoundingly being
pessimistic about the capacity of the
political system to solve the country's
problems.
>> That is a huge
shift, Nate. What do you make of that?
>> Well, first I just can't help but want
to reiterate what you said. It is a huge
shift. We don't see swings in public
opinion like this that often. I was just
saying at the beginning that
everything's the same. So when you have
a huge reversal in people's attitudes,
it means something. And if you look back
over the long history of polling, there
are other times when Americans have felt
like the conditions in the country were
worse. I mean, you can imagine like
during the financial crisis or
something, that more voters were saying
that the economy was worse and thought
that the country was in a worse spot,
but they didn't have the same pessimism
about the political systems ability to
get us back on track.
>> Right? It's like people have felt way
worse about the issues in the past, but
they've still felt that our politics was
fundamentally functional and that we
could solve our problems. And now they
feel not great about the issues and
totally pessimistic about the ability of
our political system to resolve the
problems we have now and and the ones
that will arise in the future.
>> Yeah. And I think that juxtaposition
between voters being so pessimistic
about the political system at a time
when in a lot of ways material economic
conditions aren't that bad is so
telling. Right? It would be one thing
for voters to be this pessimistic about
the political system if things were just
really really bad like at the depths of
the financial crisis and during the Iraq
war. But for it to be happening now, it
really just shows how squarely voters
are thinking about the politics itself
as the problem. Now, it's worth noting,
I guess I should caution that that
doesn't mean that voters are panicking
about the imminent collapse of American
democracy or a collapse of the
government. And you know, I think it's
fairly telling that we felt compelled to
ask about this, but we did. And only 18%
of voters say that American democracy
isn't strong enough to survive the Trump
years.
>> That's a big number in one sense, but
it's still well short of the majority of
the public thinking that the end of
democracy is right around the corner.
Mhm.
>> Only 31% say that the country is heading
off on the wrong track to such an extent
that we're in danger of failing as a
country. So, Americans are getting more
concerned about the political system
itself, but they haven't yet become
convinced that a calamity is right
around the corner yet either.
>> They're not at the worst case scenario
yet.
>> Yeah, the worst case scenarios may not
be here. At least to me, I interpret
this to mean that voters think we're
just going to kind of keep muddling
through, that things could get worse,
that we can't solve the problems that we
already have, but they're not
necessarily convinced that things are on
track to culminate in the end of
American democracy, that things will
kind of just keep on going as they are
for the foreseeable future, where we
have a pretty flawed political system,
but nothing necessarily catastrophic in
the imminent future. And yet, when you
think about that 31% that does think
America may be headed toward becoming a
failed state, yes, that's a minority,
but it's still a lot of people. It's a
significant chunk of voters who are
really at the end of their rope. Yeah.
And I'm wondering if there's ever been a
time when that kind of disillusionment
with politics has been this high. And
and the reason I ask is that something
I've been thinking about is that when
you talk to experts in political
violence, which is something we've seen
quite a bit of recently, they say that
this kind of violence tends to emerge
when people don't see any other path to
solving societal problems. That's when
people turn to violence, when they don't
think politics is the way. It's a great
question and it's a little bit hard to
answer because in the past pollsters
haven't even thought to ask questions
like this. There have been lots of times
in American history where things have
looked pretty bad. But there haven't
been too many times in the era of modern
polling which is say since you know the
mid1 1940s when pollsters would have
thought to ask about whether America
could fail as a country or whether
America might cease to be a democracy.
Those are things that Americans have
basically been able to take for granted
for the entire period when pollsters
have been conducting public opinion
research.
>> And so, as a consequence, we don't have
a long track record of questions like
this to look back on. My guess is that
such a large share of the public hasn't
had these attitudes before. The fact
that people haven't even thought to ask
is what's ultimately telling. But I
guess I don't know that for sure. Maybe
if we had asked in 1971 or something,
people would have been similarly dark.
But I doubt it. M now I should say just
because people are so pessimistic about
politics doesn't mean that they see the
other side as the enemy. You know in in
this poll more than 80% of voters said
that they saw the other side as just
fellow Americans who they disagree with
not as the enemy.
>> That's heartening.
>> Yeah. So you know you mentioned
political violence as the sort of thing
that might be likelier to unfold as
voters become more pessimistic about the
political system. And I will say with
numbers like that and with the numbers
that are produced by other polling
firms, I don't see a ground swell of
people who are inclined to pursue
political violence to achieve political
goals. What I do see is a growing share
of Americans who are willing to support
more and more extreme policies to try
and address what they see as deeper and
deeper problems with society. I think
you can even interpret the continued
political support for Trump in that
light, right? On the one hand, there are
Republicans who are likelier to support
more extreme steps by Trump that other
politicians wouldn't have taken because
they think the problems are so bad. And
then alternately, there are also people
who may not even support the more
extreme measures that Trump takes, but
are willing to tolerate them because
they think the problems are so bad or
because they think the other side is
worse. So, I I think you can see how
this pessimism affects our politics and
creates more extreme political parties
and politicians.
>> And maybe that helps explain the result
of this latest poll that Trump's numbers
have held steady despite him using a
bunch of aggressive tactics that a lot
of people really hate.
>> That's right,
>> Nate. Thanks so much for your time.
>> Thanks for having me.
We'll be right back.
>> Here's what else you need to know today.
>> So, today uh is a historic day for peace
and Prime Minister Netanyahu and I have
just concluded an important meeting on
many vital issues, including
>> in a joint press conference on Monday,
President Trump and Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu unveiled a
proposal to end the war in Gaza. Hamas
will be disarmed. Gaza will be
demilitarized. Israel will retain
security responsibility.
>> The plan would require Hamas to release
all Israeli hostages, to disarm, to play
no role in governing Gaza in the future,
and to agree to a less than full Israeli
withdrawal from the enclave. Hamas is
unlikely to accept Trump's plan in its
current form since it includes numerous
conditions that the militant group has
consistently rejected. But if Hamas
rejects your plan, Mr. President, or if
they supposedly accept it and then
basically do everything to counter it,
then Israel will finish the job by
itself.
>> Netanyahu said that if Hamas doesn't
agree, Israel would finish the job by
itself with or without international
support.
>> And uh if Hamas rejects the deal, which
is always possible, they're the only one
left. Everyone else has accepted it. But
uh I have a feeling that we're going to
have a positive answer. But if not, as
you know, BB, you'd have our full
backing to do what you would have to do.
>> And Trump warned that in that case,
Israel would have his full backing to
eliminate the group.
And Trump met with congressional leaders
from both parties at the White House,
but made no progress as the government
faced a Wednesday deadline to avoid a
shutdown. Vice President JD Vance blamed
Democrats who he said won't do the right
thing. Democrats are demanding a
reversal of the Medicaid cuts that
Republicans pushed through earlier this
year. And Senator Chuck Schumer, the
Senate Minority Leader, said there were
still very large differences over
healthcare.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Ricky
Nvetski, Michelle Banja, Claire Tennis,
and Caitlyn O'Keefe. It was edited by
Brennan Clinkenberg and Paige Cowit.
Contains original music by Marian Lozano
and Dan Pal and was engineered by Chris
Wood.
[Music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroof. See you tomorrow.
[Music]